docs(decisions): do not rely on treeshaking for correctness (#8412)
remix-run/remix: decisions/0009-do-not-rely-on-treeshaking-for-correctness.md

# Title

Date: 2024-01-02

Status: accepted

## Context

Remix lets you write code that runs on both the server and the client.

> For example, its common to have server and client code in the same route file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, it's common to have server and client code in the same route file.
```

If you or anyone on your team accidentally references server-only code from client code, the bundler will happily include that code in the client.
You won't get any indication of this at build time, but only at runtime.
Your app could crash when trying to execute code meant for the server, or worse, you could accidentally ship secrets to the client.

### `.server` modules

Instead of hoping such an accident never happens, Remix provides a mechanism for ensuring that server-only code is excluded from the client bundle; `.server` modules.
Any modules with a directory named `.server` are never allowed into the module graph for the client.
Similarly, files with a `.server` extension are also excluded from the client module graph.

Theoretically, `.server` modules are a redundancy.
A perfect module graph with perfect treeshaking shouldn't _need_ `.server` modules.
But in practice, `.server` modules are indispensable.
They are the only guaranteed way to exclude code from the client.

### An imperfect optimization

As we already discussed, even if treeshaking were perfect, it would still be a bad idea to rely on it to exclude server-only code.

> But treeshaking is a hard problem, especially in a languages as dynamic as JavaScript or TypeScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But treeshaking is a hard problem, especially in a language as dynamic as JavaScript.
```
